::: {.srj-header .hnn-header .hnn-header-home .darken-header}
\
Human Neocortical Neurosolver\

learn more
:::

[]{#learn-more}

::: {.srj}
\
\
:::

::: {.srj}
#### Take Our Survey to Support HNN! {#take-our-survey-to-support-hnn .srj-gray}

Please consider supporting HNN development efforts by voluntarily
providing your demographic information
[here](https://forms.gle/sj7t84ifvt7tugbE9). Note that any demographic
information we collect is anonymized and aggregated for reporting on the
grants that fund the continued development of HNN. All questions are
voluntary.
:::

\

::: {.srj .l-width .srj-spacious}
![](https://hnn.brown.edu/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/EEG_Brain.png){.srj-small-icon}\

# Challenge in Human Neuroscience {#challenge-in-human-neuroscience .srj-gray}

Electro- and magneto-encephalography (EEG/MEG) are among the most
powerful technologies to non-invasively record human brain activity with
millisecond resolution. They provide reliable markers of healthy brain
function and disease states. A major limitation is that it is often
difficult to connect the macroscopic scale-measured signals to the
underlying cellular and circuit-level neural generators. This difficulty
limits the translation of EEG/MEG studies into novel principles of
information processing, or into new treatment modalities for neural
pathologies.

\
![](https://hnn.brown.edu/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Model_PN.png){.srj-small-icon}\

# Solution: Human Neocortical Neurosolver {#solution-human-neocortical-neurosolver .srj-gray}

  Human Neocortical Neurosolver (HNN) is a user-friendly software tool
that provides a novel solution to this challenge. HNN gives researchers
and clinicians the ability to test and develop hypotheses on the circuit
mechanism underlying their EEG/MEG data in an easy-to-use environment.
The foundation of HNN is a preconstructed biophysically principled
neocortical column model that simulates the electrical activity of the
neocortical cells and circuits that generate the primary electrical
currents underlying EEG/MEG recordings. HNN is designed with workflows
to activate the neocortical model with activity from exogenous thalamic
and intracortical sources and tutorials on how to begin to study the
neural origin of source localized event-related potentials and
low-frequency brain rhythms\*\*. Out-of-the-box users can quickly begin
to get an intuition of how cells and circuits contribute to macroscale
signal generation. HNN can be run through an interactive graphical user
interface (HNN-GUI) or, for more advanced users, through a command line
python interface (HNN-Core). We
provide [tutorials](https://hnn.brown.edu/tutorials/) on how to import
your data and begin to understand the underlying circuit mechanisms for
both versions of the software.\
\
We are still in the early days of understanding the contributors to
these important macroscale human signals. HNN is designed as a starting
point for developing and testing predictions on the detailed neural
mechanisms contributing to EEG/MEG signals based on the known biophysics
of their generation.  The multi-scale simulation (layer and
cell-specific spiking, LFP/CSD, etc..) possible with HNN facilitates
testing of model-derived predictions across multiple recordings scales
and species. HNN  is designed in a modular fashion so that it can be
easily expanded as new knowledge of the cells and circuits that
contribute to these signals is learned. We are applying best practices
in an open-source software design to encourage widespread use and
community development. Over time, we hope that crowdsourced knowledge
using and expanding HNN will lead to biophysically principled and
validated theories of human information processing and will help guide
therapeutics for neuropathology.\
 \
  *\* HNN is not a source localization software but rather a method for
interpreting the cell and network level generators of a source signal
from a localized brain area after you have an estimate of the source
location, time course, and orientation.  There are many excellent source
localization software for this estimation process. For an example of how
to perform source localization
using [MNE-Python](https://mne.tools/stable/index.html) followed by cell
and circuit level interpretation with HNN, see our [example in
HNN-Core](https://jonescompneurolab.github.io/hnn-core/stable/auto_examples/workflows/plot_simulate_somato.html#sphx-glr-auto-examples-workflows-plot-simulate-somato-py). \
\
\*\* The tutorials on use of HNN are based on our prior published
studies of ERPs and low-frequency oscillations from the primary
somatosensory cortex. We provide data and initial parameter sets along
with workflows to teach users how to do what we did to develop and test
hypotheses on the neural origin of these signals. Once this workflow is
learned, users will be able to use HNN to test their own hypotheses. 
Our goal is not to promote singular theories on the origin of any
particular signal, but rather to provide a tool based on known
biophysics and training resources where researchers can develop testable
predictions on the neural origin of their data.*

\
![](https://hnn.brown.edu/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Gears.png){.srj-small-icon}\

# Getting Started {#getting-started .srj-gray}

  Before beginning to use HNN, please read this important [getting
started information](https://hnn.brown.edu/getting-started/).

  Once you have read this document, you can begin to use HNN with the
step-by-step instructions on our tutorial pages. In practice, we
strongly recommend starting with the [HNN-GUI
tutorials](https://hnn.brown.edu/tutorials/), after which understanding
the corresponding [HNN-Core python
tutorials](https://jonescompneurolab.github.io/hnn-core/stable/auto_examples/index.html) will
be more accessible.

\
![](https://hnn.brown.edu/wp-content/uploads/2019/06/Contact.png){.srj-small-icon}\

# Citing Our Software {#citing-our-software .srj-gray}

Neymotin SA, Daniels DS, Caldwell B, McDougal RA, Carnevale NT, Jas M,
Moore CI, Hines ML, Hämäläinen M, Jones SR. [*Human Neocortical
Neurosolver (HNN), a new software tool for interpreting the cellular and
network origin of human MEG/EEG
data*](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.51214) (2020). eLife 2020;9:e51214
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.51214 (https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.51214)

\

\
\
:::

\
\

::: {style="background-color: #F0F0F0"}
\
\
\

::: {.srj}
# Get in Touch

\
**[Stephanie Jones
Lab](https://sites.brown.edu/stephanie-r-jones-lab)**\
Carney Institute for Brain Sciences\
Brown University\
164 Angell St., Floor 4\
Providence, RI 02906
:::

\
\
\
:::

\
\
\

::: {.srj}
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  ![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jonescompneurolab/hnn-under_the_hood/master/html-styling/images/logos/logo-carney.png)   ![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jonescompneurolab/jones-website/master/images/logo_yale.png)                          ![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jonescompneurolab/jones-website/master/images/logo_mgh.png)
  ![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jonescompneurolab/hnn-under_the_hood/master/html-styling/images/logos/logo-va.jpg)       ![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jonescompneurolab/hnn-under_the_hood/master/html-styling/images/logos/logo-nih.png)   ![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/jonescompneurolab/hnn-under_the_hood/master/html-styling/images/logos/logo-nibib.jpg)
  ![](https://github.com/jonescompneurolab/jones-website/blob/master/images/logo_aarhus.png?raw=true)                                                                                                                                                        
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

\
\
\
\
\
\
